---
layout: page
title: C. elegans in Courses With Research Focus | WormClassroom
permalink: /c-elegans-in-courses-with-research-focus
---
### [Introductory Genetics ]{style="color: #800040;"}

The \"Project Lab\", which is a research-intensive course, offered by
Dr. Leilani Miller at Santa Clara University and is funded by NSF for
five years. The purpose of this course is to bring students to a
research laboratory and have them experience real life research
problems. Part of the aim is to retain students in the biological
sciences and enhance their critical thinking via the Project Lab
training.

The goal of the project is to study/isolate genes that affect the cell
fate in the process of *C. elegans*\' vulval development. *C. elegans*
is an excellent choice as the mutants are asily visualized and the vulva
is not required for viability. The working objectives for each year are
connected to the previous year and the upcoming year in terms of the
data and materials developed. For example, in the first year, students
select mutants that are defective in vulval development, then use PCR to
decide which chromosome the mutated gene is located on and to
characterize the gene in terms of its dominance or recessiveness. The
research findings will be used by students enrolled in the following
year.

While working on *C. elegans*, students learn basic biology, advanced
molecular and genetic experimental techniques, such as how to handle
worms, how to perform PCR, and how to clone genes of interest. They
learn biological concepts and experience what real life research
problems are and how to solve these problems as well (Miller, 1999).

### [Advanced Molecular Biology ]{style="color: #800040;"}

The course is offered by Dr. Joe Pelliccia at Bates College. It is a
research & seminar course which mainly provides students the experience
of doing research, like graduate students do, by using *C. elegans*. The
research question students work on is whether the *mut-2* gene
influences meiotic recombination during meiosis. By working as a group
on a project using *C. elegans*, students also experience, to a certain
degree, how *C. elegans* researchers work. For example, a *C. elegans*
database (ACeDB) hosted on several web sites is where researchers
usually search for gene sequences or particular publications. Students
are required to be able to use this resource to search and measure the
map distance between genes of interest. Students attend journal clubs
routinely to gain up-to-date information about *C. elegans*. They also
learn basic techniques, such as how to handle and experiment with *C.
elegans*. These techniques then can be used in more advanced biology
courses. At the end of the semester, students are supposed to compile
their findings, write a scientific article, and have the article
published in a newsletter of the worm community, the \"Worm Breeders
Gazette.\"

In sum, as shown above, *C. elegans* is been used in both lecture and
laboratory as a model organism. It has been used in various disciplines,
such as genetics, molecular genetics and molecular biology. From its use
in teaching, we can see the wealth of resources used from research
laboratory to education, such as the use of mutant worms and powerful
techniques like PCR. By using *C. elegans* in classrooms, educators hope
their students not only learn biological concepts but also the process
of scientific investigation and the advanced techniques/tools that will
be needed for further study in science.

References
----------

-   Miller, L. M. (Personal communication, Jun 5, 1999). A project-based
    laboratory course using *C. elegans*.
