---
layout: page
title: Development Time and Cell Numbers | WormClassroom
permalink: /development-time-and-cell-numbers
---
A 4D movie (3D plus time) that contains time lapse images of
embryogenesis provides you opportunities to ask questions that cannot be
asked with a 3D movie alone. These questions might include, \"What\'s
the relationship between the developmental time and cell numbers?\";
\"Is it linear or\...?\"; Also, \"is this relationship different among
wild-type and mutant embryos?\"

Remember the [NIH image program](measuring-size)? You can also use it to
play with the movies you are going to download. However, you need to
have ideas about what you would like to use the software for.

<div>

<div>

***[Wild Type](/files/worm/wtTime.mov "Opens in new window") (about 23
MB)***

</div>

</div>

<div>

Cell Number\*

</div>

<div>

1

</div>

<div>

2

</div>

<div>

4

</div>

<div>

8

</div>

<div>

24

</div>

<div>

100

</div>

<div>

180

</div>

<div>

350

</div>

<div>

550

</div>

<div>

558

</div>

<div>

Approximate Time for Development (minutes)

</div>

<div>

0

</div>

<div>

30 \~ 40

</div>

<div>

50 \~ 55

</div>

<div>

60 \~ 70

</div>

<div>

90

</div>

<div>

150

</div>

<div>

200

</div>

<div>

260

</div>

<div>

350

</div>

<div>

800

</div>

\* Cell numbers counted until the worm hatched.

For WT, the data about the relationship between cell number and
developmental time are from textbooks Click on the \"Wild Type\" link
above to see the embryogenesis process. Pay attention to the upper left
corner to see the actual time lapse for this wild type embryo. Also as
the WT worm embryo you saw on the main page doesn\'t have time lapse,
here we use a different wild type embryo from the one on the main page.

<div>

<div>

***[Mutant 1](/files/worm/zyg1%28oj7%29_ori.mov "Opens in new window")
and [Mutant 2](/files/worm/zyg1%28b1c%29_ori.mov "Opens in new window")
(about 5 MB each)***

</div>

</div>

<div>

Cell Number

</div>

<div>

Development was arrested at one cell.

</div>

<div>

Approximate Time for Development (minutes)

</div>

<div>

Recorded for about an hour.

</div>

 

<div>

<div>

***[Mutant 3](/files/worm/it4_ori.mov "Opens in new window") and [Mutant
4](/files/worm/zyg1%28it37a%29_ori.mov "Opens in new window") (about 2
MB and 4 MB)***

</div>

</div>

<div>

Cell Number \*

</div>

<div>

Cell development was halted.

</div>

<div>

Approximate Time for Development (minutes)

</div>

<div>

Recorded for about one hour.

</div>

\* for these types of mutants, one cell division might produce 3, 4 or 5
cells
