---
layout: page
title: Example Research - Comparative Embryology | WormClassroom
permalink: /example-research-comparative-embryology
---
It has long been hypothesized that small changes in the pattern of cell
division, cell migration, and programmed cell death in early
embryogenesis could result in significant patterning differences latter
in development due to altered cell-cell signaling. In turn these altered
developmental programs could lead to large changes in tissue and body
morphologies. This field of comparative embryology examines the early
growth of related animals to try to identify these types of differences
and to correlate them with later developmental differences. As nematodes
have largely invariant cell lineages from a single cell zygote to the
adult and as the complete lineage is known for C. elegans. Nematodes are
ideal for this sort of comparative approach. Indeed, studies have shown
that specific changes in the pattern of blastomeres divisions underlie
some of the major divisions of the nematode phylum.

Sex Determination
-----------------

As has been already stated the genetic pathways that control sex
determination change very rapidly. One hypothesis has suggested that the
down stream activators that directly regulate female and male specific
genes are in fact highly selected and thus conserved. However, the
upstream factors that determine the sex of the animal are not so subject
to selection and thus are freer to change and to add additional levels
of regulation. This is one focus of work on sex determination that can
be easily studied in closely related nematodes by using forward and
reverse genetic approaches to identify sex determination genes in
related animals to study the actual conservation of individual
components both at the sequence level and the pathway level.

Mating System
-------------

A second rapidly evolving trait under study in nematodes is mating
systems. Throughout the nematode phyla, as for C. elegans, many
nematodes have a hermaphroditic sex (essentially a female that produces
sperm as well as eggs) and a male sex. Often some of the closest
relatives to these species exhibit a gonochoristic mating system, the
species has a female sex and a male sex. This implies that switching
between mating systems is very rapid. The phylogenetic relationships
within some nematode families suggest that hermaphroditism has arisen
many times independently. The independent acquisition of the same trait
in discrete animal and plant lineages is a common occurrence in nature.
Are the same genes involved in each evolutionary event? What selective
pressures lead to these events? If they are the same genes, why can't
the same solution arise in another way?

The nematode vulva is an ideal system to study changes in cell
signaling. The nematode vulva is a complex structure through which eggs
are laid; it connects the uterus to the outside environment and is an
essential component of the nematode body plan. As such, it is presumably
a homologous structure among all nematodes. In C. elegans, the vulva is
composed of the descendents from three epidermal cells. The principal
cell interactions that coordinate vulval development in C. elegans
involve only these three cells and an organizing cell of the gonadal
primordium, i.e. four cells in total. The development of the vulva in
many other nematodes also involves a small number of homologous cells.
Yet despite the homology of the vulva and the cells involved among
nematode species, a large number of changes have been noted in the
signaling that occurs between these cells to regulate development of the
adult structure.

Lastly, like the vulva, the gonad is a highly conserved complex organ in
nematodes. Also like the vulva, in all nematodes its post embryonic
development involves the descendants of a relative few number of cells,
often two somatic precursor cells and one or two germline precursor
cells. While the adult nematode gonad consists of tubular ovotesties
patterned along their length, among disparate species the number of
ovotesties (one or two) and the cellular composition and morphology of
both germline and somatic tissues can vary greatly. Thus the nematode
gonad offers insights into the evolution of all the processes required
to form a functional organ such as: changes in the regulation of cell
divisions to produce the proper number of cells, changes in cell
signaling among both somatic and germline tissues, changes in basic
cellular architecture, changes in fundamental cellular processes such as
migration and cell death, and changes in the patterning of the germ line
and the generation of gametes. The processes are fundamental to the
development of all metazoans and changes in these processes are
requirements for the evolution of novel morphologies.
