---
layout: page
title: C. elegans in Lecture and Labs | WormClassroom
category: projects permalink: /c-elegans-lecture-and-labs
---
Most of the educators use *C. elegans* in laboratory sessions that
accompany a lecture course.

### [Introductory Biology]{style="color: #800040;"}

[Example 1.]{style="color: #408080;"}

Dr. Stephanie Aamodt teaches an introductory biology course at Louisiana
State University-Shreveport in the Department of Biological Science.
Students in this course learn basic biological concepts and techniques.
Due to the ease of cultivation and the availability of mutant worms, *C.
elegans* is chosen as the experimental organism for students to work
with. Students learn how to use microscopes, how to distinguish
different sexes, how to characterize wild-type and mutant worms, and how
to observe behaviors in different environments such as, those in which
there are different chemical substances. By observing and examining
wild-type and mutant worms, students can learn to size a worm, how worms
move and how worms sense, how worms react to different chemical
gradients, how mutant worms react differently from wild-type worms to
stimuli, and realize how mutations can influence behaviors.

While using *C. elegans* as a model organism, Aamodt mentioned some
disadvantages of its use. Its small size makes it hard for beginning
students to handle and manipulate. In addition, she points out that the
currently used *C. elegans* databases (ACeDB: A *C. elegans* DataBase),
which is used by researchers, is not student-friendly (Aamodt, 1999).

[Example 2.]{style="color: #408080;"}

Dr. Elizabeth DeStasio teaches an introductory biology course at
Lawrence University-Appleton in the Department of Biology. Students work
as a team on a small project with the faculty. They learn general
methods of scientific research, including hypothesis testing, data
collection, and interpretation of results, and the importance of
controls in a research project. The use of *C. elegans* provides
students chances to practice scientific methodology. For example,
students experiment with the motility of *C. elegans* by using wild-type
and motional mutant worms. They measure and compare tail-beats/min of
different worms. By doing this experiment, they learn the importance of
controlling some variables (such as the sex of the worm) in order to get
reliable data. Students also use *C. elegans* to observe how it reacts
to chemical substances and whether it is able to learn. In this course,
*C. elegans* acts as a model organism for students to learn basic
biological concepts and experience the scientific research process
(DeStasio, 1999).

### [Advanced Evolution ]{style="color: #800040;"}

Dr. David Fitch offers a course, Principles of Evolution, for graduate
students at New York University in the Department of Biology. *C.
elegans* is used as part of the instructional material. Primarily,
literature on the worm is used for students to discuss concepts in
evolution. For example, papers about heterochronic mutants of *C.
elegans* are assigned for students to discuss how this might be used to
explain macroevolutionary changes.

Another use of *C. elegans* in this evolution course is literature on
its vulval development. The developmental process of vulva in *C.
elegans* is especially suitable for the study of developmental genetics,
because *C. elegans* is transparent, making the tracing of cell lineages
possible. The mutant and wild-type phenotypes are easily observable as
well. As it is feasible to trace *C. elegans*' vulval development,
research literature produced from this development is widely available
and is useful for students to study certain principles in both
developmental genetics and evolution (Fitch, Hubbard, & Clark, 1999).

### [Advanced Genetics]{style="color: #800040;"}

This genetics course, designed by Dr. William Morgan at Wooster College,
allows students to learn the principles and methodology of genetics,
using *C. elegans* as an experimental model organism. *C. elegans* is
used in the laboratory to engage students in solving genetic problems
and exploring genetic concepts. Students study the properties of genes,
such as how a mutated gene in a worm influences the worm's phenotype.
Under Morgan's supervision, students design their own experiments to
decide whether a specific mutation is dominant or recessive to the
wild-type phenotype. By working on wild-type and mutated worms with
known genetic backgrounds, they learn how to determine where an unknown
mutated gene is located in the worm's chromosomes.

As Morgan mentioned, by working on *C. elegans*, students learn how to
handle this powerful model organism that can be used in further studies,
such as in developmental biology and molecular genetics. *C. elegans*'
various mutants, such as motion defective worms, are good materials for
students to learn how genes influence phenotype, such as behavior.
Students not only learn genetic concepts, they practice the process of
scientific investigation and become familiar with the techniques that
are needed for advanced genetic studies.

### [Advanced Molecular Biology]{style="color: #800040;"}

[Example 1.]{style="color: #408080;"}

Morgan not only uses *C. elegans* in teaching genetics, he also uses it
in molecular biology as well. The laboratory section for his molecular
biology course is a mini-project under Morgan's own research project
which was granted by NIH and is mainly working on two genes - *kin15*
and *kin16* that encode two tyrosine kinases. Students use *C. elegans*
to practice powerful molecular biological techniques. For example, they
perform PCR (a technique that enables researchers to amplify a small
amount of DNA into detectable amounts) to select desired mutants
(Morgan, 1999a; Morgan, 1999b).

[Example 2.]{style="color: #408080;"}

This course is a "molecular methods lab" conducted by Dr. James
Lissemore at John Carroll University. It focuses on exposing students to
advanced molecular biology techniques. *C. elegans* is used as an
experimental material for students to practice different advanced
molecular methods, such as PCR. Its importance is that it can be used to
expose the difference between alleles of the same gene. For example, if
a gene with a mutated allele will result in certain kinds of diseases,
PCR can be used to screen whether certain individuals have this mutated
gene. As it is a powerful and commonly used tool, ability to perform
this technique is necessary for students in molecular biology. In this
laboratory, *C. elegans* is used as an experimental system, much like
*E. coli*. Students extracted genomic DNA from wild-type and mutant
worms, (e.g. mutation in *unc-93* gene) respectively. They then use
these extracted genomic DNA to perform/practice PCR and see whether the
*unc-93* gene is deleted in any of these worms. PCR results are
represented as different DNA band patterns on an agarose gel, which is
then stained with a fluorescent dye to show the bands. By comparing the
differences among resulting patterns from different mutants, students
are able to acknowledge the power of PCR. Usually students are able to
perform this experiment and obtain the expected results (Lissemore,
Lackner, & Fedoriw, 1999).

### [Advanced Molecular Genetics]{style="color: #800040;"}

This is a National Science Foundation (NSF) funded course taught by Dr.
Bruce Wightman at Muhlenberg College. Students design their own
projects, and are exposed to inquiry-based learning. In this course, *C.
elegans* serves as an experimental organism for students to learn
molecular genetics. The project they are working on is to learn DNA
cloning by using *C. elegans*. Thanks to the completion of *C. elegans*'
genome sequence and its availability on the world wide web, students
search the genome database on the web and find a gene of interest to
work on for the whole semester. By working on cloning a gene of interest
in *C. elegans*, students learn various techniques and practice research
methodology, including the design of an experiment. For example, they
start with the search of a gene of interest for assessing the function
of this gene. Along with the scientific learning process, they also
learn powerful techniques, such as PCR (Wightman, 1999).

\[img\_assist|nid=85|title=Wild type and mutants|desc=This figure shows
one wild type (in upper left corner) and 5 locomotion defect worms. As
you can see, the moving patten of mutants is different from wild type.
This is to show how locomotion defect can affect worms&\#039;
motion.|link=none|align=left|width=410|height=146\]In this physiological
laboratory, taught by Dr. Taylor Allen at Oberlin College in the
Department of Biology, *C. elegans* is used to enhance the concepts
students learned and involve them in experimental design. Dr. Allen
mentioned that the reason he picked *C. elegans* for students to work
with is because of the large numbers of available mutants. It is easy to
find motional defective worms to be used in muscle physiological
experiments. For example, the phenotype of worms with a selected
missense mutation in the *unc-54* gene has a limp paralyzed phenotype,
yet the worms' muscle structure is not destroyed. As this is an
open-ended physiological laboratory, students are involved in designing
their own experiments. They use wild-type and mutant worms to measure
muscular performance, using tail-beats/min. By observing and doing these
experiments, they come to realize the relationship between muscle
structure and muscle function. For example, by comparing wild-type to
mutants, students realize that to possess the same muscle structure does
not mean the muscles will perform the same function equally.
Furthermore, students can apply this understanding to some human
diseases, such as certain human heart diseases and muscular dystrophy.

By using *C. elegans* in this open-ended physiological experiment,
students gain both understandings of certain physiological concepts and
techniques that can be used in tackling other physiological problems, as
well as an in-depth understanding of scientific methodology (Sulcove &
Allen, 1999).

References {#references style="text-align: left;"}
----------

-   Aamodt, S. (Personal communication, Jun 5, 1999). *C. elegans*: a
    model organism for teaching?
-   DeStasio, E. (Personal communication, Jun 5, 1999). *C. elegans* in
    introductory biology projects.
-   Fitch, D., Hubbard, E. J., & Clark, S. (Personal communication, Jun
    5, 1999). Worms in class at NYU .
-   Lissemore, J. L., Lackner, L. L., & Fedoriw, G. D. (Personal
    communication, Jun 5, 1999). Using PCR in an undergraduate lab
    course to detect deletions in the unc-93 gene.
-   Morgan, W. R. (1999a, Nov. 5). [Bio 306 genetics home
    page]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}, \[on-line\]. Available:
    http://www.wooster.edu/biology/wmorgan/bio306/ \[2004, Dec 10\].
-   Morgan, W. R. (Personal communication, Jun 5, 1999b). Use of *C.
    elegans* in undergraduate biology courses.
-   Sulcove, J., & Allen, T. (Personal communication, Jun 5, 1999).
    Development of an open-ended muscle physiology experiment with *C.
    elegans*.
-   Wightman, B. (Personal communication, Jun 5, 1999). Surfing the
    genome: using the *C. elegans* genomic sequence to teach molecular
    genetics.

