---
layout: page
title: Evolutionary Biology Questions | WormClassroom
category: projects permalink: /evolutionary-biology-questions
---
1.  Why does a cell divide?
2.  Do all cells divide in the same manner? What things are similar and
    what things are different between the division of different types of
    cells?
3.  If not, why?
4.  Why does an organism develop the way it does?
5.  Do all organisms develop the same way?
6.  How and when does a sperm enter an egg?
7.  What, why and how are the similarity and difference among organisms'
    development?
8.  Are there common cellular components among organisms?
9.  What do the common components do?
10. Why are there common components among organisms?

More About the Study of Evolutionary Biology
--------------------------------------------

In general, evolutionary biologist are interested in understanding how
all the different creatures that are present today arose and how these
creatures interact with each other and the environment to generate the
ecosystems we see today. So evolutionary biology involves researchers in
many fields, for example cladistics, paleontology, genomics, population
genetics and ecology, and developmental biology.

Cladistics is the discipline of reconstructing the relationships between
organisms. That is, when did two discrete organisms last share a common
ancestor? As the relationships between individual species and among
related clades become better resolved based upon morphological and
molecular similarities, complex familial relationships can be inferred
and represented as a tree like network where the closest relatives
represent adjacent tips on large branches. The network of all living
things is called the tree of life.

Paleontologists study the fossil record to trace back morphological
features that can be used in cladistic studies. Genomics is the
accumulation and annotation of the genetic codes for living organisms.
Once an organism’s genome sequence is known, it can be compared with the
sequences from other organisms to determine relatedness. Additionally,
genomic researchers can look for patterns in the genes that are present
in one group of animals but not others and in the way the genes are
arranged with respect to each other and other non-coding sequences to
gain further insights into how genomes and thus animals evolve.

Population genetics study the frequency of the different alleles for a
gene in a population and the effects of population size, life
strategies, and environmental effects on the frequency of these alleles
over time.

Comparative developmental biology tries to understand the molecular and
cellular differences that have resulted in the disparate morphologies
among organisms, i. e. why is a butterfly’s wing different than a fly’s
wing.

More on Studying Evolutionary Biology with *C. elegans*
-------------------------------------------------------

*C. elegans*, or the worm, is a model developmental organism. This means
that along with a small group of additional animals and plants (such as
fruit flies, mouse, zebra fish, and Arabidopsis), it has been chosen as
a system for detailed molecular and cellular studies. The worm’s
strengths are its easy laboratory handling and its tremendous
amenability for genetic and cellular manipulation.

Over the past fifty years, studies in these systems have indicated that
all animals share a large set of common molecules for their growth and
development and that these molecules often associate with each other in
common pathways to synthesize structural components, to allow
communication between cells and tissues for coordinated growth of the
organism, and to interact with the environment. This was perhaps the
first major observation of evolutionary developmental biology and *C.
elegans* was crucial in providing many of the inroads in understanding
cell signaling, for example many of the founding members of the TGF-ß
pathway, the EGF pathway, and the Notch pathway were first molecularly
identified in the worm. Likewise, many cellular and regulatory processes
that are proving to be of importance throughout the tree of life were
also recognized and investigated in the worm at a very early stage, for
example programmed cell death, nonsense mediated decay of mRNAs, post
transcriptional regulation by micro RNAs (miRNAs), and the existence of
RNA mediated interferences by short interfering RNAs (siRNAs).

While the last fifty years of comparisons have stressed how similar the
metabolism and development of living things are, little has been learned
about how animals evolve to have differences. This is perhaps the
principal focus of much research today. What changes occurred to make
all the different morphologies and life strategies we observe in
organisms today? Is there a pattern to what kind of changes can occur at
a molecular level and how do both molecular and environmental
constraints affect the evolution of morphologies and life strategies?

It is easy to see that organisms use the same pathways for very
different purposes. For example, flies use the EGF pathway for eye
development and worms use the same pathway for vulva development. So,
identifying difference has not been difficult. What has been problematic
is explaining how the same pathway came to be used for two very
different structures. Similarly, organisms often use the same pathways
for putatively homologous structure that have vastly different
morphologies. For example, flies have legs and humans have legs, but
these two structures are very different from each other. Nevertheless,
the development of both structures is dependent upon many of the same
genetic pathways.

While we know the genes that regulate these two structures are the same,
the structural components they target are so radically different between
these animals that it is difficult to explain how the novelties between
the resulting limbs evolved from a common ancestor. Thus, knowledge from
organisms closely related to those well studied is required. This allows
the opportunity to look for differences in morphologies and in genetic
pathways in an organism where direct cellular and molecular homologies
can be implied and allows the putative change resulting in a novelty to
be directly investigated by experimentation and comparison. These
species closely related to the model organisms are called satellite
model systems.

Several nematodes are in use as comparative systems with *C. elegans*.
Depending on the time of separation with *Caenorhabditis elegans,* these
other nematodes can be used to ask a variety of questions. The two
nematodes *Caenorhabditis briggsae* and *Caenorhabditis remanei* are
very closely related to *C. elegans* and offer the potential to
investigate the importance of highly conserved elements to cellular and
genetic processes in this genus of worms, i.e. these elements (either
nucleic acid or amino acid sequences) are maintained due to selective
forces while elements without a necessary function are under no
constraints and can change. Often however, as the animals are so closely
related they appear morphologically identical and few differences can be
observed. Thus, these species are best for the study of very quickly
evolving traits like sex determination.

In these close satellite species, molecular players often have seemingly
identical roles, thus if a difference is seen a hypothesis about the
molecular players that have changed can be quickly formulated and
tested. Nematodes a bit farther away from *C. elegans* in the tree of
life, such as *Oscheius tipulae* and *Pristionchus pacificus*, allow an
easier identification of morphological and cellular differences, for
example differences in body patterning and organogenesis. They also open
up investigation in cellular processes and pathways that evolve more
slowly. However, a greater divergence time results in many more
molecular changes having occurred. Thus, using data from *C. elegans* to
make hypotheses about the molecular changes that underlie morphological
novelties becomes less direct and a greater amount of experimental
manipulation and data collection may be required to give insights.
