---
layout: page
title: Making 4D Movies | WormClassroom
category: projects permalink: /making-4d-movies
---
One of the most prevalent types of microscopy is the optical sectioning
microscope (including phase, nomarski and confocal microscope), where
the researcher can make 4-dimensional recordings (3D + time) of their
biological samples. The UW-Madison's [Laboratory for Optical and
Computational Instrumentation](http://loci.wisc.edu) (LOCI) has
developed a suite of tools to collect, annotate and analyze 4D data from
optical sectioning microscopes.

\[img\_assist|nid=246|title=Basic 4D Digital Microscopy Setup|desc=This
is the basic setup that researchers used to make the movies on this
site. Image from DeVries, J.H., Thomas, C., White, J. (1996).
Four-Dimensional Imaging: Computer Visualization of 3D Movements in
Living Specimens. Science, 273,
603-607.|link=none|align=none|width=400|height=433\]

4D Demo Movie
-------------

<div style="width: 400px; height: 300px;" data="/files/worm/4D.swf"
type="application/x-shockwave-flash" height="300" width="400">

</div>

This is a 4D movie that was composed by 3 [focal
planes](/focal-planes "Focal Planes") - focal plane 2, 4 and 6 (for
demonstration purpose we only picked 3 focal planes to use). Hit play,
then try to go up, down, forward and backward to see how the movie
changed with the changing depth and time. For instance, you might see
nuclei in focal plane 6 but not in focal plane 2 and 4.

Optical Sectioning Microscopy: Various Focal Planes of a 4D Data Set {#optical-sectioning-microscopy-various-focal-planes-of-a-4d-data-set style="font-size: 1.5em;"}
--------------------------------------------------------------------

This image is an expansion of a 4D movie like the one you saw above. It
consists of 4 focal planes with 5 time lapses. A 4-dimensional data set
consisting of time-lapse images taken at predefined intervals and
optical sections.

Researchers can specify the number of optical sections they wish to
observe for a given time point and then the 4D system changes focus to
obtain each optical section or focal plane. Such optical sectioning not
only allows researchers to observe events that might be happening at
different planes of focus but will also allow them to create a data set
that has the biological events they are studying in the best focus. For
example, here, the researcher used 4 focal planes with 5 time intervals
for every focal plane. The images you see here are all from a single
embryo. Accordingly, **each row, from left to right, is the same embryo
in a different time lapse. Each column, from top to down, is the same
embryo in different focal plane.**

![Changes in focal depth](/files/worm/FPdepth.jpg){width="499"
height="300"}

![Changes in time](/files/worm/FPtime.jpg){width="499" height="300"}

When the recording was done, he/she needed to pick a focal plane that is
the clearest among all the planes. Here, from top to bottom, the 3rd
image might be the best choice, i.e, it allows the biological events to
be seen most clearly. However, one drawback to committing to one focal
plane is that events taking place in other optical sections are no
longer seen. This is the reason why in some of the movies you cannot see
the early nuclei clearly; they are out of focus due to the fact they are
in another optical section.
