---
layout: page
title: A Short History of C. elegans Research | WormClassroom
category: projects permalink: /short-history-c-elegans-research
---
\[img\_assist|nid=29|title=Dr. Sydney
Brenner|desc=|link=none|url=|align=left|width=150|height=198\]In 1963,
Sydney Brenner observed that the success of molecular biology was due to
the existence of model systems, defined as extremely simple organisms,
such as bacterial phage that can be handled in large numbers. With the
awareness of how important model systems are in biological research, he
introduced *Caenorhabditis elegans* (*C. elegans*) as a model organism
for pursuing research in developmental biology and neurology.

Ever since its introduction by Brenner, *C. elegans* has been widely
used in research laboratories (Wood, 1988). Due to its value as a
research tool, a sophisticated knowledge infrastructure has developed,
with freely disseminated research methods and protocols. The
experimental attributes of *C. elegans* that make it successful in
research laboratories also make it a favorable organism in teaching.
Below, I will discuss the characteristics that make *C. elegans* so
popular in research.

A Model Experimental System: Properties of C. elegans
-----------------------------------------------------

*Caenorhabditis elegans* (*Caeno*, recent; *rhabditis*, rod; *elegans*,
nice), is a free-living, non-parasitic soil nematode that can be safely
used in the laboratory and is common around the world (Donald, 1997
\[fn\]Donald, D. L. (Ed.). (1997). *[C.
elegans]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}*[
II]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}. New York, NY: Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press.\[/fn\]).

It is small (about 1 mm in length), transparent for ease of manipulation
and observation, feeds on bacteria, such as *E. coli*, and it can be
easily and cheaply housed and cultivated in large numbers (10,000
worms/petri dish) in the laboratory. *C. elegans* has five pairs of
autosomes and one pair of sex chromosome. It has two sexes,
hermaphrodites and males. Sexual determination in *C. elegans* is
similar to *Drosophila*; the ratio of sex chromosomes to autosomes
determines its sex. If the 6th chromosome pair is XX, then *C. elegans*
will be a hermaphrodite. A XO combination in the 6th chromosome pair
will produce a male. Hermaphrodites can self-fertilize or mate with
males but cannot fertilize each other. In nature, hermaphrodites are the
most common sex. When hermaphrodites mate with males, 50% of the progeny
will be males and 50% will be hermaphrodites. In the laboratory,
self-fertilization of hermaphrodites or crossing with males can be
manipulated to produce progeny with desired genotypes that are
especially useful for genetic study. In addition, *C. elegans* is
extremely fecund-a hermaphrodite can produce about 300 to 350 offspring
under self-fertilization and more if it mates with males. These traits
make it easy to produce numerous genotypes and phenotypes for genetic
research. (Donald, 1997; Horvitz, 1997\[fn\]Horvitz, H. R. (1997). [A
nematode as a model organism: the genetics of programmed
death]{style="text-decoration: underline;"} \[Film\]. Cogito Learning
Media, Inc. Available: http://www.cogitomedia.com \[1999, Jul
20\].\[/fn\]; Wood, 1988 \[fn\]Wood, W. B. (Ed.). (1988). [The nematode
*Caenorhabditis elegans*.]{style="text-decoration: underline;"} New
York, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.\[/fn\]).

\[img\_assist|nid=26|title=C. elegans life cycle (click to
enlarge)|desc=|link=node|align=right|width=200|height=200\]In addition,
*C. elegans* has a short life cycle. From egg to egg takes about 3 days,
about the same time needed for genetic crosses in yeast. Its life span
is around 2 to 3 weeks under suitable living condition. Compared to the
use of other model organisms, such as mice, the short life cycle of *C.
elegans* reduces the experimental cycle and facilitates biological study
(Donald, 1997; Kenyon, 1988\[fn\]Kenyon, C. (1988). The nematode
*Caenorhabditis elegans*. [Science,
240]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}, 1448-1452.\[/fn\]; Wood,
1988).

What is unique to this organism is that wild-type individuals contain a
constant 959 cells. The position of cells is constant as is the cell
number. Moreover, it is transparent. It is easy to track cells and
follow cell lineages. The complete cell lineage, depicting which cells
are derived from which, was completed in the 1980s by John Sulston. This
provides a great tool for research on how genes influence cell fate.
These traits enable the study of the biology of a single cell in an
intact, living organism. Research on development and morphology can be
done with a single cell within this multicellular organism (Donald,
1997; Horvitz, 2004\[fn\]Horvitz, H. R. (2004). [Genetic control of
nematode development and behavior
]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}\[on-line\]. Available:
http://www.hhmi.org/research/investigators/horvitz.html (2004, Dec
10).\[/fn\]; Kenyon, 1988; Wood, 1988).

\[img\_assist|nid=31|title=C. elegans cell lineage (click to
enlarge)|desc=|link=node|align=left|width=200|height=89\]The genome size
of *C. elegans* is about a hundred million base pairs. This is
approximately 20X bigger than that of *E. coli* and about 1/30 of that
of human. The genome of *C. elegans* was completely sequenced at the end
of 1998 (BBC, 1998). It is the first multicellular-organism (animal)
that has a completely sequenced genome. Robert Waterston noted the value
of this accomplishment when he said, "This is a tremendously gratifying
moment and more of a beginning than an end. We have provided biologists
with a powerful new tool to experiment with and learn how genomes
function. We'll be able to ask-and answer questions we could never even
think about before." Moreover, as its genome is surprisingly similar to
that of humans (40% homologous), *C. elegans* becomes an attractive
organism in the study of human diseases. For instance, in human
leukemia, large numbers of immature white blood cells (WBCs), which
normally die before getting into the blood stream, are in patients'
blood circulation. The study of Programmed Cell Death (PCD, or
apoptosis) in *C. elegans* might help us to understand why these
immature WBCs didn't undergo PCD. In addition, the genome database of
*C. elegans* is available worldwide. Researchers share their findings in
*C. elegans* genome via the internet with other researchers from around
the world. The process of sharing the genome database on the world wide
web provides a working framework for researchers who are working on the
human genome project (BBC, 1998\[fn\]BBC. (1998, 10 Dec). Small worm
makes history. [BBC]{style="text-decoration: underline;"} \[on-line\].
Available:
http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/sci/tech/newsid\_232000/232608.stm
\[1999, Jun 9\].\[/fn\]; HGP, 1998 \[fn\]HGP. (1998, Mar 12). [Human
genome project
progress]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}.\[on-line\]. Available:
http://www.genome.gov/10001399 \[2004, Dec10\].\[/fn\]; Hodgkin,
Horvitz, Jasny, & Kimble, 1998 \[fn\]Hodgkin, J., Horvitz, H. R., Jasny,
B. R., & Kimble, J. (1998). *C. elegans*: sequence to biology. [Science,
282]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}, 2011.\[/fn\]; Horvitz, 2004;
Kenyon, 1988; Muhlrad, 1998 \[fn\]Muhlrad, P. (1998, Jul 8). [Worms are
a lot more similar to people than you may
think]{style="text-decoration: underline;"} \[on-line\]! Available:
http://www.mcb.arizona.edu/wardlab/relevant.html \[2004, Dec
10\].\[/fn\]; Pennisi, 1998 \[fn\]Pennisi, E. (1998). Worming secrets
from the *C. elegans* genome. [Science,
282]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}, 1972-1974.\[/fn\]).

\[img\_assist|nid=32|title=C. elegans mutants|desc=a. normal, b. dumpy,
c. small, d. long|link=none|align=right|width=250|height=135\]Moreover,
there are many *C. elegans* mutants available for biological research,
which is especially important for genetic study. Some genetically
determined traits, such as motility mutants, are easy to observe.
Therefore, powerful genetic experiments can be conducted using simple
microscopes to observe the inheritance of traits in *C. elegans*
mutants. When a mutant is found, it can be crossed with worms having a
known genetic background and, further, one can learn where this mutated
gene may be located and define its function.

\[img\_assist|nid=28|title=Dr. John
Sulston|desc=|link=none|align=left|width=150|height=185\]In 1969, John
Sulston developed a technique to freeze and thaw the worm. As a result,
the numbers and availability of both wild type and mutated worms have
increased (Donald, 1997). Moreover, many tools have been invented to
speed up research using *C. elegans*. Advanced microscopes, various
antibodies, different kinds of reporter genes for labeling and the use
of laser microbeams to ablate individual cells are examples of such
tools (Donald, 1997; Kenyon, 1988; Wood, 1988).

*C. elegans* is a model experimental organism that possesses simplicity,
is small in size physically and genomically. It is multicellular and
develops from a fertilized egg to an adult worm just as a human being
does (Angier, 1995 \[fn\]Angier, N. (1995). [The beauty of the beastly:
new views on the nature of life]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}.
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.\[/fn\]; Donald, 1997). In conclusion, the
properties of *C. elegans* and the research done using *C. elegans*
provide a wealth of information and an attractive pool of resources for
researchers. Also, this well-established model system provides educators
a good resource in teaching biology.
