---
layout: page
title: Teaching With Model Organisms | WormClassroom
category: projects permalink: /teaching-model-organisms
---
Model organisms are those that useful data sets have been already
gathered to describe basic biological processes. And they are more
amenable to asking certain questions due to their simplicity of
structure and features (Bolker, 1995). In order to explore the
advantages of using model organisms in classrooms, I will examine their
desirable attributes, why certain organisms have been chosen as model
organisms for teaching, the advantages of using model organisms in
teaching, and examples of model organisms popular in biology
instruction.

Characteristics of Model Organisms for Research and Instruction
---------------------------------------------------------------

![](/files/worm/CEpink.jpg){width="152" height="49"}A model system is a
simpler, idealized system that can be accessible and easily manipulated
(Rosenblueth & Wiener, 1945). Therefore, when selecting living organisms
as models to work with, certain criteria are used depending upon the
experimental purposes. As a result, there is a wide range of
characteristics common to model organisms, including: 1) rapid
development with short life cycles, 2) small adult size, 3) ready
availability, and 4) tractability (Bolker, 1995). Being small, growing
rapidly and being readily available are crucial in terms of housing
them, given the budget and space limitations of research and teaching
laboratories. Tractability relates to the ease with which they can be
manipulated. For example, *C. elegans* is a popular research organism as
it possesses all the characteristics mentioned, yet shares many
essential biological properties with humans. For instance, researchers
who study apoptosis (programmed cell death) use *C. elegans* as an
experimental organism in the hope of finding treatments for certain
types of human cancers, such as leukemia. By studying apoptosis in *C.
elegans*, researchers hope to identify genes that switch-on cell death
in cancer cells, thus, using the cell's own genetic machinery to rid the
body of malignant cells. Because leukemia is the unregulated growth of
white blood cells, identifying genes involved in apoptosis may provide
researchers with a tool for treating the rapid proliferation of cancer
cells.

Advantages of Using Model Organisms in Teaching Biology
-------------------------------------------------------

![](/files/worm/Ecoli.jpg){width="98" height="91"}Model organisms have
long been used in the classroom to help students learn important
concepts in various disciplines. Each discipline has its own set of
organisms which have proven to be most suitable to use. For example, *E.
coli* and *Drosophila* have been widely used as model organisms in
introductory biology courses to teach microbiology and genetics.

There are three obvious advantages to using model organisms in teaching
biology. First of all, in a laboratory setting, the model organism's
immediate response to the change of environment will enhance students'
learning and serve to hold their attention and interest. Furthermore,
students not only understand what they see, but also believe it is real
(Manney & Manney, 1992). Secondly, the use of model organisms involves
hands-on activities that provide a unique experience that could not be
obtained with other teaching methods (Rowan, 1981). Thirdly, by working
with model organisms, students are able to explore scientific methods
and concepts themselves. Moreover, they will come to understand about
the investigative nature of the scientific enterprise, including how
conclusions are drawn from data (Manney & Manney, 1992; Mertens, 1983).
These three advantages might be obtained by using any living organism.
However, model organisms are well-established experimental systems
possessing certain properties, and are more amenable to classroom use
(Bolker, 1995; Brenner, 1974).

Why Have Certain Living Organisms Been Chosen as Model Organisms in Teaching?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

### **![](/files/worm/Drolifecycle.jpg){width="160" height="508"}**

In general, scientists have to work with organisms different from the
ones they wish to apply their findings to for several reasons (Bolker,
1995; Flannery, 1997). Krogh (1929) wrote " â€¦ for a large number of
problems there will be some animal of choice or a few such animals on
which it can be most conveniently studied." Model organisms act as
surrogates that enable experiments to be carried out under a more
favorable environment than would be available in the original system
(Rosenblueth & Wiener, 1945).

The biological insights gained from using model organisms have helped to
cure human diseases and improve people's understanding of life.
Moreover, by studying organisms unrelated to humans, insight into
scientific concepts can sometimes be more easily achieved. Paul Williams
once mentioned that "Major advances in biology often come when diverse
disciplines focus on model organisms." (Wisconsin Fast Plants (WFP),
2003). One example was the discovery of giant chromosomes in
Drosophila's salivary glands that improved researchers' understanding of
genetics.

The characteristics of model organisms that have made them useful in
research laboratories also make them well-suited to classrooms (Manney &
Manney, 1992). Compared to general living organisms, model organisms are
well-established experimental systems and are often ready to be used in
classrooms. The available resources, such as experimental protocols, for
these model organisms make the transition of their use to curricula
relatively simple. Thus, many are amenable to be used as experimental
organisms in teaching.

Examples of Model Organisms Popular in Classroom Use
----------------------------------------------------

As discussed above, model organisms do play an important role in
conveying biological concepts. Many model organisms have been used in
the classroom. The fruit fly, *Drosophila melanogaster*, is the most
obvious organism used in teaching. It is often used for students to
learn Mendelian genetics. *E. coli*, yeast, and *Rana pipiens* are also
popular model organisms in biology education. Within the past two
decades, due to its importance and popular use in research, *C. elegans*
has begun to take its place in the classroom as an important model
organism. Below, I describe some of the model organisms, and the reasons
that make them popular for classroom use.

### *Escherichia coli*

*Escherichia coli*, a prokaryotic organism without a nuclear membrane,
is a representative living material often used in laboratories and
classrooms (Flannery, 1997). *E. coli* reproduces rapidly (under optimal
situation 0.5 hr/generation) such that results for a number of
experiments can be quickly obtained. Certain mutants of *E. coli* have
been defined that cannot express certain proteins at saturation growth,
and, therefore, die. *E. coli* was also the organism used to elucidate
the regulation of the *lac* operon in genetics. *E. coli*'s ability to
take up exogenous genetic material under the procedure known as
DNA-mediated cell transformation has also made it a popular model for
studies using recombinant DNA (Moss, 1991). Using recombinant DNA
techniques, *E. coli* can be manipulated in research laboratories and in
the classroom to produce any DNA, RNA or protein of interest. Also, it
is easy to manipulate both genetically and biochemically. Most
importantly, it shares fundamental characteristics, such as DNA and
messenger RNA, with all other organisms (Botstein & Fink, 1988). The
value of *E. coli* in recombinant DNA makes it a good model organism for
students to study the genetic material.

### *Drosophila*

The fruit fly, *Drosophila melanogaster*, has been the most popular
eukaryotic organism used in classrooms. It has been used in heredity and
biomedical research where the aims are to understand human genetics and
developmental processes. It is also a popular model for teaching
Mendelian genetics. *Drosophila* is very popular and successful as a
model organism because it has short life cycle of two weeks, making it
possible to study numerous generations in an academic year (Flannery,
1997; Kramer, 1986; Sofer & Tompkins, 1994). It is easy to culture and
inexpensive to house large numbers (Flannery, 1997; Jeszenszky, 1997;
Kramer, 1986). Its size is amenable for cultivation in school
laboratories. Also, it is large enough that many attributes can be seen
with the naked eye or under low-power magnification (Sofer & Tompkins,
1994). Moreover, it has a very long history in biological research
(since the early 1900s) and there are many useful tools to facilitate
genetic study. For example, the use of antibodies makes the scoring of
specific cells or cell types possible in *Drosophila* (Rubin, 1988;
Sofer & Tompkins, 1994).

Because of the above properties, *Drosophila* has been used in research
and teaching in a great variety of disciplines, such as classical and
molecular genetics. Some researchers use *Drosophila* to study how its
body plan is controlled by a set of homeotic genes. The more research is
done using *Drosophila*, the better we understand it, thus making it an
attractive model organism for class use (Flannery, 1997; Rubin, 1988).

### ![](/files/worm/WFPLifeCycle.jpg){width="230" height="300"}Wisconsin Fast Plants

Wisconsin Fast Plants (WFP), mainly rapid-cycling *Brassica rapa (B.
rapa)*, were developed by Dr. Paul Williams at the University of
Wisconsin - Madison, using classical selective breeding. The WFP, as
well as Chinese cabbage and radish, belong to the *Brassica* genus,
which is part of the Crucifer as family. The selection of fast growing
Creicifers was desirable to speed-up plant biological research as
traditional breeding of *Brassica* takes about six months. WFP has been
used in the laboratory and classroom for studying basic and applied
plant biology. For example, WFP can be used to study environmental
science for students to see how pollutants affect living organisms,
plant responses such as phototropic and geotropic responses, cell
biology and other biology issues. The advantages of using WFP is that
under continuous fluorescent light, they have a short life cycle (35 -
40 days). Compared to normal *B. rapa*, which produces at most two
generations per year, one can harvest about ten generations per year
from WFP. They are small (15 cm high, in a 2 cm2 pot) and can be housed
in high densities and large numbers which make them especially good for
school use. They are low-cost and easy to manage. They possess a wide
variety of easily recognized traits that can be used in genetic studies.
For instance, by crossing plants with light or dark plant colors,
students can experiment on simple Mendelian genetics (WFP, 2003).

### *Caenorhabditis elegans*

In the last two decades, a nematode, *Caenorhabditis elegans*, has
captured the hearts of developmental biologists and geneticists hoping
to solve the enigma of cell development and related biological problems,
such as aging. In addition, educators have begun to use it in classrooms
to illustrate central biological concepts, such as cell division (see
"[A Survey of Currently Used *C. elegans*
Curricula](http://wormclassroom.org/ce.html#survey)"). Its popularity as
a model organism is because it is transparent, thus cells of interest
can be observed using a dissecting microscope. It is small (about 1- 1.5
mm) and easy to cultivate, which makes it possible to house large
numbers of *C. elegans*. It has a short life cycle (3 days), which makes
the production of numerous generations possible. It can be crossed at
will. Male and hermaphrodites are the two sexes. Hermaphrodites can self
fertilize or mate with males to produce offspring. Thus, cross or
self-fertilization can be manipulated as desired. There are numerous
tools available to study *C. elegans*, including different types of
antibodies and advanced microscopes. Its genome has been completely
sequenced. This is quite attractive and useful in genetic studies
allowing researchers to pick a gene of interest to study (Donald, 1997;
Wood, 1988). In sum, as discussed, some organisms are easy and amenable
for use in the laboratory and the classroom to enhance our understanding
of human biology. They are called "model organisms". A model organism is
one that possesses the virtues of tractability and accessibility that
can be used in experimental manipulation both in school and research.

References
----------

-   Bolker, J. A. (1995). Model systems in developmental biology.
    [BioEssays, 17]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}(5), 451-455.
-   Botstein, D., & Fink, R. G. (1988). Yeast: an experimental organism
    for modern biology. [Science,
    240]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}, 1439-1443.
-   Brenner, S. (1974). The genetics of *Caenorhabditis elegans*.
    [Genetics, 77]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}, 71-94.
-   Donald, D. L. (Ed.). (1997). [*C. elegans*
    II]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}. New York, NY: Cold Spring
    Harbor Laboratory Press.
-   Flannery, C. M. (1997). Models in biology. [American Biology
    Teacher, 59]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}(Apr), 244-248.
-   Jeszenszky, W. A. (1997). Managing the fruit fly experiment.
    [American Biology Teacher,
    59]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}(5), 292-294.
-   Kramer, C. D. (1986). The classroom animal - fruit flies. [Science
    and Children, Apr]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}, 30-33.
-   Krogh, A. (1929). Progress in physiology. [American Journal of
    Physiology, 90]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}, 243-251.
-   Manney, R. T., & Manney, L. M. (1992). Yeast: a research organism
    for teaching genetics. [American Biology Teacher,
    54]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}(7), 426-431.
-   Mertens, R. T. (1983). Open-ended laboratory investigations with
    *drosophila*. [American Biology Teacher,
    45]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}(5), 264-266.
-   Moss, R. (1991). Genetic transformation of bacteria. [American
    Biology Teacher, 53]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}(3),
    179-180.
-   Wisconsin Fast Plants (WFP). (2003). [Wisconsin Fast
    Plants]{style="text-decoration: underline;"} \[on-line\]. Available:
    http://fastplants.org \[2004, Dec 10\].
-   Rosenblueth, A., & Wiener, N. (1945). The role of models in science.
    [Philosophy of Science, 12]{style="text-decoration: underline;"},
    316-321.
-   Rowan, N. A. (1981). Animal in education. [American Biology Teacher,
    43]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}(May), 280-282.
-   Rubin, M. G. (1988). *Drosophila melanogaster* as an experimental
    organism. [Science, 240]{style="text-decoration: underline;"},
    1453-1459.
-   Sofer, W., & Tompkins, L. (1994). Genetics in the classroom -
    *drosophila* genetics in the classroom. [Genetics,
    136]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}, 417-422.
-   Wood, W. B. (Ed.). (1988). [The nematode *Caenorhabditis
    elegans*]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}. New York, NY: Cold
    Spring Harbor Labortory Press.

